Well, first of all, what's your name? Me? Yes.
Secundino. Secundino Vaca. And where in Mexico
were you born? In the state of Guanajuato. In which
town? On one side of Salamanca, on the coast of
Salamanca. In town or ranch? In a ranch, just over
there. It's like everybody said, the brine in
here, the bottom, or something like that. It's not
the same there. It's the same condo. It's like
here, the bottom, you know. Anybody can say that
brine. Was it near a river? Is your ranch near a
river? Yes. What is the name of that river?
Nassos.
The river Nassos. I went through the river. I went
through the bridge. Now when I wanted to fix my
papers for my passport, They said that there was no
record of anyone there. That there was nothing
there. Well, since I've been here for many years,
since I passed my passport and settled it. And from
there, when I came from... When I came from over
there, I was in Fort Worth. Fort Worth lasted eight
days, and in eight days I walked back again. When
you came here? When you
first came here? Yeah, when I first came here. Then
just, I think
it's close, but in August, in September, I don't
know, I don't remember so good, but one of those
months. Then, but, you know, last January, yes,
that's when I get a lot of work, because I have no
time to spend, but, you know, I was just working
from 4 o'clock to work. And then I stayed eight
days, and then eight days, on some kind of camp,
make work, you see. And then... In qué año? 1921.
1921. Y en qué año venía a los Estados Unidos en
primero? In 1920.
Mm-hmm. Y para qué razón? Hmm? Para qué razón? Why
did you come here? Yo para trabajar aquí. Was
it
like that then? Yeah. In 1920? 1921. But they
didn't find a record there, too. Because I wanted
some kind of record, but at that time, until 1930, I
believe, that's when I wanted a record, you see.
Because she wanted a record that way, and she
couldn't I can't get nothing in Hueco, too.
Because you can't find nothing in Hueco. But she
passed a long time in my, the records that she throw
away, or I don't know, because I never signed my
name. I know I couldn't sign it, because I never
signed it at that time.
And where did you come across the border? Where did
you come into Texas? I'm coming to Laredo. On a
train? No, no, you had to cross to the bridge. The
bridge. Papier. Hm? You walked across the bridge.
Yeah. Well, back before that, when you were
growing up in Mexico, what was it like? Well, a
long time ago, I never seen no cars over there.
Now I've been all down there. I see plenty of cars. I
see tractor in the field too.
She got plenty of water. You know, if it don't rain,
there's plenty of water. Now, she don't have it
before.
No, no. There was water, but not in the river. They
didn't go up there to water the land. What kind of
work did your mother and father have? The ranch, to
plant. Was it your own land? No. We lived here. It
was just a little ranch. Well, I never met the
landowner. There was one who gave me a piece of
land. If I had to work the land, mules or whatever,
he gave me a piece of land to work. And the other, if
it didn't look good, he didn't give it to me. What
was your father's name? Gregorio Vaca. And your
mother? Dolores Hernandez.
Were they from this part of Mexico? Yes, they came
from there. From all their lives? Yes, they never
came here. I have all my brothers, I don't think
anyone came here, just me. And I'm the only one
alive because they all died. All your brothers?
How many brothers did you have? I had three
brothers and two sisters, but they all died. Now
it's just their nephews and their children. And
all of your nephews are in Mexico? Yes, they are in
Mexico. And
during the revolution, were there problems in
your ranch? Yes. What happened during the
revolution? During the revolution, well, they
were at home at night. It's like here, I'm in my
house. At night they come and knock on the door, I go
out to see. And then they put the carabiners there,
that I have carabiners, I have something here. And
they want to kill me because they say, and they go in
to see what's there. Well, I don't feel it. Y
cuántos años tenía usted? No, yo creo que tendría
como unos 10 o 12 años. Fue en 1912, 1910, something
like that. En qué año nació usted? Yo tengo 72. 72
años ahora.
Es...
After 1912,
is everything good or are there more problems?
When the revolution ended, there were a lot of
people who came to the houses. They said it was
Pancho Villa. And no, it was Pancho Villa. Four or
five of them would go to steal from the other ranch.
They would take what they had and say, go with
Pancho Villa. Pancho Villa didn't do anything to
the people. He wasn't stealing.
Who could? Pancho Villa would steal from the ones
who had money, not the poor ones. The ones who had
money. because they didn't want to pay. I remember
that my father told him that he worked for three
reales in Mexico at that time. I think it was 36
cents. That's where we worked. All day. Three
reales per day. I don't know. I don't think I can
make a living right now. Because I'm used to it here
now. I like seeing her go and stay awake and coming
back. I can't make it. Well, did you visit Mexico?
Yes. It was in April. In April? Last year? Yes, last
year in April. Was it the first time? Yes, the first
time. In 1920. It was the first time. Tell me about
your trip. Well, it was good. Because we didn't
last long. Let's say we go by bus or train. It takes
longer. We get on the plane from San Antonio and in
an hour and a half
we get to Guadalajara. And from there we take the
bus to Salamanca. We get to the lagoon. What time do
we get there? Did
it
look like you remember, or did it look different,
Mexico? Is it the same? No, it's not the same as it
was when I was there. In what way was it different?
It was different because there were no cars. They
planted it the same way, but they have a different
way of working. The land too. Before that, they
used to work on the land with a mill. They didn't use
mules there. No? No. What kind of animals did they
have these days? Animals? Yes. Well, they were
like cows. There were some who collected them. But
there are no mudas these days? No, I don't see them.
Horses? Not really. We went to the ranch where I was
born. We went to the ranch and stayed there for a
while and then we came back. But I don't see them.
Yes, there are. What is your ranch called?
Comaleros, le dijeron comaleros. Comaleros. ¿Y
cuánta gente vivía allá? No, no hay muchos. ¿Y
ahora? Tampoco. Viven unos allí, otros allá por
retirado, y otros para allá, y así no viven, solos.
¿Las casas están separadas? Unas y otras no.
And who lived in your parents' house last April? I
didn't know them. I didn't know them because they
are other people. I didn't know them. But was it the
same house? Yes. It's renovated. They served.
Maybe... Is it possible to see your book?
Bring the book. Bring the book. Hello. Hello. I'm
Mary Lee Knowles. Oh, you're Mary Lee Knowles.
Your father's being kind enough to tell me
something about his experiences. trying to
record stories of people who came here between
1910 and 1920. We
can cut this off.
Maybe it's possible for you... He's my brother. Is
he your brother? He's older than me. But he died.
And before he died, what kind of work did he have?
The same kind of work, to plant there. All your
life? Yes. In Guanajuato? Yes. And your other
brother? Well, that's where I came from. He was
half a year old. He didn't work yet, but he knew what
he was doing. I didn't know him. And your sisters?
They got married, but they died. There are only the
brothers-in-law. The men got married with them.
And where do your brothers-in-law live now? They
are there, in the ranch. In the ranch, not in the
city? No. My sister-in-law is the wife of this one.
She lives in the village. She lives in Salamanca.
In Salamanca. And she had children? Yes. How many
children? I turn on the light and look. How old are
Regina's children? I mean, I didn't learn much.
They have so many that I don't even know. There are
two girls and two boys. Did they also live in
Salamanca? No, I think they are in Mexico.
In
the city? Yes. What kind of work did these girls
have? I don't know because I didn't know. I didn't
know when I came. What kind of work did you have?
Well, when you were about 20 years old, you left for
Texas, right? I left for Texas. How? By train? By
train. Tell me about this trip. How many days did it
take? From there? Yes. Well, two.
Two days? Two days to Laredo.
Yes. I left, I left from there, they took me to the
train. We took the train and stopped in a part over
there, in Palme Gonzales. From there, we took
another train and it came all the way here to
Laredo. Yes.
And...
Were you alone? Yes, I came alone. Completely?
Completely. There are no relatives or anyone in
the United States? No. Well, this is a very brave
thing,
isn't it? For... Well, I think... After you came to
the
United
States.
Yeah, in here. In Bastrog. Bastrog. Well, he says
he works in the Bastrog mines. Yes, I also work
there. Is this your first job here? No, because I
was working on the wagon. Yes. But from there, when
I went to Anto, I worked in the mines. And this, what
is this thing? This is where they took out the coal.
Yes. There they left something there and they
emptied it down and took it up. And for how many
years do you work in Bastro? Well, I've been there
since... In 1924. I was already there for a year.
From there I went to Chicago in 1926. One year
later, in 1926. I stayed there until 1927. I came
and I was released again.
And when I came back, I was working there again, and
I came back. And then I didn't come back, but I came
back in 1928. On the 8th of September, I came here to
the Boramo. And I started working there. Here I am
working, and I don't go anywhere. I worked a lot
there in the ranches. Until I came here, to the
town. This one? Yes. In which year? No, I don't
remember.
I don't remember which year it was. Ah, yes. This is
your husband? Yes. And where was your husband
born? He was born in Mexico. In which part? He was
born... I don't know. Where
do you live? In Lompocitos, Coahuila. In
Lompocitos. Lompocitos, yes. In Estancia? Yes,
in Estancia, Coahuila. In what year did you come to
the United States? In 1920 too. In 1920 too? Yes, in
1920. For what reason? My mother had a son and we
came with him. He sent us here again with him. His
brother. My mother and I only. My father was
already dead for many years. He wanted us to come
here with him. He was 15 years old when he passed
away and we came here with him. We stayed here until
today. Here we are, we have been here for many
years. I have been to Mexico many times, but I'm
just going to visit, that's all. Because I don't
live there in Mexico, it's my land and everything,
I mean, I was born there. But I'm already further
away from here, and I think he too. Yes, because now
that we went there, because the ranches are very
sad, he taught us where he grew up and everything.
In the village it's a little bit better. In
Salamanca it's a little bit better. Because in the
rural areas it's not. And what part of life do you
have in the ranch? No, the ones that are in the
ranch... No school? No school. The ones in the
ranch, no. The ones in the village, yes. But the
ones in the ranch, they go to school. In these days,
before 1920? Yes. Now there are no schools? Now
that we went, we didn't look. Now that we went, we
saw that in the ranch. In the ranch, there are so
many boys who go to school, but nothing. No, in the
ranch, they don't. They grow up, they work where
they can, in labor, I think. And this... I didn't
know how to read. No, he didn't know. I didn't know
how to read when I went to this side. I came to teach
myself how to read here with my friends. I taught
myself how to make letters. Now I can't do it
anymore. I can read a letter and... Who knows? I'm
struggling with some letters. But no... I didn't
know. I didn't know how to read. There are no
schools without... There were no schools. There
were no schools. There aren't any, I think, yet.
But it's very beautiful, the place we went to. Yes.
It's very beautiful. Yes, Guanajuato. That's
what Mexico has. Have you visited Guanajuato?
Yes, yes. We went there, yes. In what year? It's
been a year since April. In this same year? Yes, in
this year. We went there on the 15th of April. We
went there on the 15th of April. Next April, it will
be a year. You go there all year round? No, no. We
took a week. A week. A week, I understand. In April.
Yes. In April, in 1972. Yes. In April. Yes, we went
there for a week. Yes, a week. Yes, but it's very
far. Yes? It's very far, yes. Well, for me it's not
very far, as we saw. No, well, in the long run.
But... In the long run, but... Over there it's...
Yes, because people take about three days to get
there. In a car. Where? Where? Over there, in
Salamanca. From here? From here. Yes, about two
days. Yes, about two and a half days. No, I don't
think it's even that far. How do the guys from
Sino-Michigan get here? They stay here for a day,
and then it's one night, and then all night, and
then a whole day, and then they get here. And then
they go back, and they want to know... And then they
go back, and then they go back, and then they go
back, and then they go back, and then they go back,
and then they go back, and then they go back, and
then they go back, and then they go back, and then
they go back, and then they go back, and then they go
back, and then they go back, and then they go back,
and then they go back, and then they go back, and
then they go back, and then they go back, and then
they go back, and then they go back, and then they go
back, and then they go back, and then they go back,
and then they go back, and then they go back, and
then they go back, and then they go back, and then
they go back,
It's okay. Well, maybe too many voices.
Well, it's okay. And in what year did you meet him?
In 1924 in Bastrop, right? Yes, in Bastrop. And
what kind of work did you have in Bastrop? The
mines. The mines? The coal mines. And you? I did
nothing at home with my mother. How old were you at
that time? I was 14. 14? 14 years old. Quite young.
Yes, 14. And your mother, what kind of work did she
have? I assisted people, I aborted people. And
your brother? My brother is also in the mine. Yes.
And your family in Bastrak was only these three
people? Your mother and you? Yes, nothing else.
And your brother? Yes, nothing else. And you were
alone? Alone. Completely alone? Yes, alone.
Well, after I married, Where
are you going? We're staying there. We're staying
there. We're still working on the mine. Yes. For
how many years? No, we don't work there much. Many
years? No. No. And these things... They are on Iowa
and other places. From here, when we went to work in
the time of the war, we were working. The war of...
Yes, the number two. The number two. Before that,
did you go to other places or only after the war? No,
only there. Only there. We went to work. We went to
work in Metaveli. Metaveli and then to La Cebolla.
Yes? For how many years? I don't remember how many
years it lasted. We lived like four years in a row. I
think so. Like four years, every year. Every year
for four years? But only during the war? No. How do
you say? We went, we came back and we were here like
right now. Right now there is no work over there. We
are here and then In May we started to get work. That
was when we came back from here to work there again.
Yes. And then we came back again, because what we
had left, I didn't have work anywhere else. Only in
the farm, in the labor. Yes. That's where
we had it. But that was the work that we did every
year. Yes. Did you like this job? No. No? Why not? It
was very hard working. We had to walk on the street.
We had to clean the table. Yes. It was very hard
working. Now they say that they bring a hoe like
here in the ranch. A long hoe. But then, no. They
gave us a hoe and they would mow it for us. Just like
that. Yes. If I could go. In Pinaba, yes, or in Cabo.
That's how they did the work, but it was very hard.
The work was very hard. Yes, the work was very hard.
Yes.
And were you there by car or? Sometimes we were on
the train. On the train. The first time we were on
the train. No. Let's see. Yes, I think so. The first
time we went in a truck. There was a man who brought a
truck. The second time we went on the train. They
sent us tickets for the train. The other time I
bought a car and we went in it. And
the next year we were... It lasted about five
years. I couldn't go there anymore when one of the
girls who helped me got married. And then the other
one too. And then she wasn't as good as this one who
is here. This one, since she was a little girl, she
was told that her feet weren't good. And I didn't
leave because then I had to take them to Galveston.
There were many trips from here to Galveston to
help them and bring them and all that. And where
did you live during the rest of the year, during
this year? When we went and came back. Yes. We
rented a house over there. Down here? Down here.
And what kind of work did you have during the rest of
the year? No, I came here, I worked in the city, I
worked where they gave me work, and I worked.
Different jobs? Different. I didn't work all the
time in one single job. Different, because when I
worked in the city I was digging. So I didn't have a
machine. And when I worked with the plumber, it was
the same. It was the same thing. I had to dig. Yes.
And now what kind of work? Now I'm working in the
school. I'm sweeping the rooms. In the school? Is
it good work? No, it's good because it's not very
heavy. San Jose. San Jose school? Yes. What school
is this? Well, there is the church and the Catholic
school. The big church of San Jose. And there is
also the school. And they do the cleaning of
everything. For how many years did you have this
job? I've been there for about 4 or 5 years now. And
before what? Before this work. I was at the
academy. Who knows how long you've been working
there? I've been there for about 4 or 5 years. And
all her children went to school here? Yes, all of
them. Her house for many years? Yes, yes.
And these are more... Ah, Chiquita got married, is
she her oldest daughter? Yes, yes. And her husband
is from here? Yes, he is from here. No, Chinta.
Chita. Oh, Chita. They are in Michigan. In
Michigan? Yes, in Michigan. There they are. And
her husband? He is also there. Is he from Michigan?
No. Well, here they got married, but they left for
another country. Here they got married and they
have a mother. Yes. This lady who just came is his
sister. Oh, yes. And what kind of work did Chinta
have? Chinta's husband? No, he didn't work here. I
think he worked in Piscando Algodón and all that.
They worked like that when they were here. But
since they left, they didn't... They also went to
Betabel, over there, when they left. No, it's just
that there was work there on the Antani plant and
there it is. She's working in a hospital now.
And this is your...
Is this about your trip? Yes, yes, yes. This is my
daughter, Alicia. Yes. They took her there, I
think, in Brandeis.
And this one in Guadalajara. Do you like
Guadalajara? Yes, it's beautiful. Salamanca
too?
Yes, it's beautiful. There are a lot of refineries
there. I don't know what they do there. Was it
gasoline?
I don't know. There was no gasoline. Because it was
so different from where you came from. Yes, it was
so different from the years I lived there. Very
different. Yes. Was life different in the ranch as
well? The farms are not the same. The farms are the
same. I think they are the same. They are the same.
They are exactly the same. Exactly. They are sown,
we saw the wheat sown, like here, where there are
parts that are sown in wheat, oats and chickpeas,
and all that, alfalfa and everything. The people,
the people of the ranch live with what they get from
work, that's all. No fiestas o nada? No. Nada.
Nada? Nomás ahí en el rancho. Sí.
¿Y su familia fue de un rancho también? ¿La mía? Sí.
Pues no. No. Allí en Las Minas. Las Minas también.
Las Minas. Las Minas, sí. There are mines here on
the banks of the river. From Piedras Negras to
there. Yes, the border. Is the life of the mines
different from the life of the ranch? Yes, because
the ranch is pure labor. And the mines are not. They
are just pure mines. And this?
Well, in those mines, one is buried on the way,
almost on the way. It goes down, it goes about 200
feet down. And then it walks underneath to go to
work there, far from there. Yes. And when the time
comes, it comes there and they take it out. But if it
breaks, it falls. Yes. Those who have died there,
here in Mexico, In Mexico, a mine exploded and many
people died. And
this is her sister-in-law?
Yes, sister-in-law. She was the one we went to see.
Is this her house? It's her little house. I think
this is the little house. It's going to be
renovated, right? This is the little house where I
was born. It's going to be renovated. They
renovated it. Yes. That's where they were
created. They were condemned in that little
house. Yes. This one. You were born here? Yes. Yes.
In this one. Yes. And this one? Is this the same one?
Yes, it's the same. This is the river. There is a man
on the other side and they have this thing to pass to
this side. He brings a donkey. And he threw it
inside and passed it to this side. And the girls
portrayed him. They portrayed the man with that.
Was he the same in the days before 1920? The regent.
With the boat too? There was one, but that one was
worn with a stick. Ah, yes. It's more modern now.
Yes, it's more modern. That one is more modern. And
what is this? Well, here is where they portrayed
the man who came. This is the man who brought the
gun. He said that they portrayed him again. When he
passed by, they portrayed him again. Yes, yes. How
far is it? It's very... It's very... Is your ranch
far away from Salamanca or not? It's far away. How
long does it take to get there? We were taken by car.
We didn't last very long. We would go in the morning
to the village. We would get up at 4 a.m. and we would
wake up in the village. I was
afraid of crossing the river when my father died.
There was a bridge. We had to cross that bridge and
we were so far apart. I was afraid of crossing the
bridge because we were surrounded by water. And
the people who lived in your house, were they nice
or not? The people who now live here. Oh, we didn't
know them. I think those people left. Oh, yes. We
just went there because... And there are people in
the house, there are people living there. We went
there for my sister-in-law. My sister-in-law was
the one who took me there. Because... We had gone on
our own, who knows if they found us. They don't know
us.
There was a lady who said she remembered me. She's
old now. It's a little house. She lives alone in
that little house. It's a little room. There she
cooks, there she sleeps and everything. It's a
fireplace, there she makes food. Down on the
floor. Down? Down on the floor. She's very old. And
he says he remembers that rabbit because he met him
when he was very young. Yes. Yes, he remembers.
He was still a child. But he is not a relative? No.
No, he is just a friend. And
life there is not very different.
Well, it's different here, because here you live
better. Here you live better than there. Well,
life here in Texas is better now or not? No, of
course not. It's much better. Because before we
also worked, I worked to be a father since the day.
Here? Here? Three pesos a week. All day. All day.
Sun
up, sun down. Now, more or less, you earn more than a
dollar an hour. Everything is expensive, but you
earn more. You pay your bills, or whatever.
Everything costs you. But at that time,
everything was very cheap. The food, the clothes,
everything, everything was cheap. But as you
wish, you didn't have to pay three pesos to buy a
pair of pants. Otherwise, it would cost you one
peso. Well, you would have to pay one peso to the
three of us to buy the food. As you wish, it's very
different now.